# For review only---DO NOT CITE

## Abstract 91

### Children’s Acquisition of Morphosyntactic Variation

Child language acquisition involves learning both categorical and variable grammatical patterns. Categorical patterns are invariable; language users do not deviate from them. For example, English determiners always occur before nouns, as in the computer rather than after nouns, as in *computer the. In contrast, variable patterns are characterized by optionality; speakers can choose from more than one form to express the same basic meaning. For example, speakers of English can express or omit complementizer that, as in ‘I think (that) Ana is nice’. Similarly, in Spanish and many other languages speakers have the option of expressing subjects or omitting them. Patterns of grammatical variation are highly systematic among adults (Carvalho et al., 2015; Labov 1994, Poplack 2018, Tagliamonte 2012, among others). Nevertheless, we still know very little about how such patterns develop during childhood. 



In this talk, we present our four-stage developmental pathway for the acquisition of morphosyntactic variation (Authors, under review), according to which children must first override the tendency to regularize variable input (Stage 1) and then override the tendency to assign different meanings to different forms (Stage 2). We argue that overriding these tendencies involves increased exposure to the forms in variation and increased experience with variation itself. The talk includes suggestions for testing the hypotheses generated by the proposed pathway of development of morphosyntactic variation, which we illustrate by drawing on the acquisition of variable Spanish subject pronoun expression. We also discuss what happens after children have assigned one meaning to two forms, and suggest that further development proceeds in a piecemeal fashion such that children first alternate between variable forms in contexts for which there is abundant evidence for variation in the input (Stage 3), and over time they vary between constructions in more contexts (Stage 4).



References

Carvalho, Ana Maria, Rafael Orozco, & Naomi Shin. 2015. Subject pronoun expression in Spanish: A cross-dialectal perspective. Washington DC: Georgetown University Press.



Erker, Daniel, & Gregory Guy. 2012. The role of lexical frequency in syntactic variability: Variable subject personal pronoun expression in Spanish. Language 88(3), 526-557.



Labov, William. 1994. Principles of linguistic change: Internal factors. MA: Blackwell.



Poplack, Shana. 2018. Categories of grammar and categories of speech: When the quest for symmetry meets inherent variability. In N. Shin & D. Erker (Eds.), Questioning Theoretical Primitives in Linguistic Inquiry (pp. 7–34). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.



Shin, Naomi (2016). Acquiring patterns of morphosyntactic variation: Children’s Spanish subject pronoun expression. Journal of Child Language 43(4), 914–947.



Tagliamonte, Sali. 2012. Variationist sociolinguistics: Change, observation, and interpretation. Malden, MA/West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell.
