# For review only---DO NOT CITE

## Abstract 95

### Naturalistic Language Input to Blind, Deaf/Hard-of Hearing, and Typically-Developing Infants: a Quantitative and Qualitative Analysis

Blind, deaf/hard-of-hearing (DHH), and typically-developing infants have divergent sensory experiences, but does their early linguistic input vary as well? Quantitatively, DHH and typically-developing children are reported to hear equivalent adult word counts in naturalistic recordings (VanDam et al., 2012); this has never been examined in blind children. Qualitatively, parent speech is found to vary across groups in utterance-type (blind vs. sighted; Kekelis & Anderson, 1984; Moore & McConnachie, 1994) and parent responsiveness (DHH vs. hearing; Nittrouer, 2010). While blind children quickly catch up to typically-developing peers on language milestones (Landau & Gleitman, 1985; Perez-Pereira & Conti-Ramsden, 1999), DHH children learning spoken language often experience persistent delays (Moeller et al., 2007). However, no previous work compares language input across blind, DHH, and  typically-developing infants, using one methodological approach. We tackle this here, asking whether parent speech varies by infants’ sensory abilities: quantitatively (Analysis 1: talk amount), and qualitatively (Analysis 2: talk content). 

Analysis 1: We measured speech input using LENA daylong audio-recordings from blind infants (n=5; age: 9-31 mos.)*, DHH infants (n=11; age: 14-31 mos.), and typically-developing infants (n=22; matched to DHH on age or hearing-age, maternal education, and gender; age: 6-31 mos.). Using LENA’s Adult-Word-Count estimate, we find no significant differences in speech input quantity across groups (ps> .05 by Kruskal-Wallis Test; Fig.1). 

        Analysis 2: We collected 30-minute video-recordings of unstructured parent-child interaction from one blind infant (n=1; age: 10 and 14 mos.)*, and used analogous video-recordings from DHH (n=22; age: 13-16 mos.) and typically-developing infants (n=18; age: 13 mos.). These video-recordings were fully transcribed and part-of-speech tagged. We focus on sense-specific adjectives as one way parents may provide linguistic descriptions of perceptual features that their children cannot access. Adjective tokens were coded as amodal, visual, tactile, hearing, smell, or taste. While we found no difference in overall adjective quantity or in proportion of amodal adjectives (Kruskal-Wallis test; p>.05), adjective modality differed by group (Fig.2). Specifically, DHH infants heard the smallest proportion of hearing-related adjective tokens (Bonferroni-corrected Dunn Test, p=.035; Fig.2).

        Taken together, these results suggest that (1) blind, DHH, and typically-developing infants are exposed to approximately the same amount of linguistic input but that (2) the content of this input may be tailored to the child’s sensory experience, particularly for DHH infants. Notably, speech in the environment of DHH infants may misrepresent speech heard by these children; our qualitative result of fewer hearing-related adjectives said to DHH infants highlights a further difference in their input. In contrast, while Ns are low, blind infants appear to hear similar speech input as sighted peers, with more work needed. These results provide initial data on how much parents talk to blind, DHH, and typically-developing infants, and how modality-specific this language input may be. This in turn has implications for the language learning trajectories and lexicons of infants with differing sensory experiences.



* In US/Europe: Incidence of blindness in children is 3/10,000; incidence of DHH (>40 dB) is ~10/10,000 (Gilbert 2003; CDC, n.d.). This difference is reflected in our sample sizes; recruitment is ongoing.
