# For review only---DO NOT CITE

## Abstract 72

### Task-Dependent Impact of Adult Words on Vocalization Patterns in Angelman and Down Syndromes

Background: North American children who hear more adult speech vocalize more and have better language outcomes (e.g., Ramírez‐Esparza, García‐Sierra, & Kuhl, 2014). Furthermore, recent evidence suggests that adult and child vocalizations may vary by setting and task, meaning that certain tasks may be well-suited to evoke particular vocalization patterns in typically developing children and their caregivers (Soderstrom & Wittebolle, 2013). Children with neurogenetic syndromes, such as Angelman syndrome (AS) and Down syndrome (DS), exhibit language delays early in development; however, it is unclear whether adult speech and task context similarly impact early speech development among children with these syndromes, as most research has been conducted in non-syndromic populations. Importantly, children with neurogenetic syndromes may exhibit differences in their responsiveness to adult words or sensitivity to task context which influence the efficacy of standard intervention approaches. Therefore, clarifying these associations in neurogenetic groups provides an opportunity to tailor early intervention strategies to the needs of these unique populations (Mahoney et al., 2020). This study examines child vocalization patterns and the impact of adult speech across three discrete tasks – child-only play, unstructured parent-child interaction, and structured parent-child interaction. 

Method: Six children with AS (aged 11-19 months) and 15 children with DS (aged 5-20 months) completed PANDAbox, a series of parent-administered play-based tasks via telehealth. We focus on 3 tasks from PANDAbox: the Developmental Play Assessment (DPA), Parent-Child Interaction (PCI), and Story Time (ST). During DPA, children play independently with 3 sets of toys for 8.5 min while parents are instructed to refrain from engaging with their child. During PCI, the child and parent play together with another set of toys for 10 min. During ST, parents are provided with a short book to read with their child (task length: 1-6 min). We used the LENA system (Xu et al., 2008) to audio record all 3 tasks. We used utterance-level data obtained from LENA software to calculate the number of child vocalizations (CV) and adult words (AW) that occurred during each task, which we converted to rates (count/min) to account for varying task lengths. We predicted (1) that there would be a positive association between CV rate and AW rate during PCI and ST and (2) that CV rate would be higher during PCI and ST than during DPA. We also explored (3) whether CV and AW rates are different between PCI and ST. 

Results: We conducted analyses in R. We used non-parametric analyses (Wilcoxon, Spearman’s) and discuss results in terms of effect sizes due to our small sample. We ran analyses for each group separately. CV and AW rate were not significantly associated during any tasks for either group (rho’s<.37, p’s>.497; Figure 1). CV rate during PCI and ST was generally higher than CV rate during DPA for AS (PCI: W=11, p=.310, d=.58; ST: W=11, p=.310, d=.65) and DS (PCI: W=78, p=.158, d=.71; ST: W=63, p=.042, d=.73; Figure 2). CV rate did not differ between PCI and ST for either group (p’s=1.00; Figure 2). AW rate was higher during ST than PCI for both groups (AS: W=24, p=.394, d=.64; DS: W=181, p=.004, d=1.14; Figure 2). 

Conclusion: We found that children in both groups tend to vocalize at higher rates while interacting with a parent compared to supervised independent play, and parents’ word counts were highest while reading a book with their child. However, child vocalization rate was not related to adult word rate in either interactive task, suggesting that adult vocal behavior may not impact child vocal patterns over and above the effect of task context during short, structured tasks. These findings can inform language treatment planning by clarifying which factors are relevant for increasing child speech rate for children with neurogenetic syndromes.
