# For review only---DO NOT CITE

## Abstract 52

### Intervention for word-finding difficulty for Arabic preschool children starting to use English as additional language

Introduction: Approximately 5% of pre-school age children exhibit episodes of stuttering Howell (2011). These and other speech disfluencies need to be identified at an early age so that intervention can take place before the problem becomes acute. When children are not speaking their native language, instances of whole word repetitions (WWR) occur which is an indication that they are having Difficulty Finding Words (WFD). WFD is a communication difficulty that can occur in the speech of monolingual children, but it is more frequent in the speech of children who use English as an Additional Language (EAL) (Howell et al., 2017). This study aimed to treat WFD in Arabic children with EAL by training them on aspects of English phonology that they lack. It was hypothesized that intervention involving exposure to unfamiliar phonological sequences should increase familiarity with such structures, improve overall fluency, lexical access and language measures. 

Methods: Twenty two Arabic typically-developing children (Mage = 5.5; 15 female) with EAL and twenty nine children with other first languages including English and French (Mage = 5.6; 12 female) participated in the study. The two groups were recruited at two different schools. Children were assessed pre- and post-intervention. The intervention involved repetition of English phonotactic non-word structures that are absent from Arabic. A spontaneous 200-word speech sample was analyzed for whole word repetitions (an indication of WFD) and the percentage occurrence of dysfluency symptoms out of all syllables spoken (%SS).  Phonological performance was assessed by non-word repetition (NWR) performance. Narrative comprehension and picture-naming tasks were conducted in English. Picture-naming required phonological structures to be used that corresponded to those included in the intervention materials.

Results: Results supported the overall effectiveness of the intervention; this was indicated by a significant reduction in reaction time (RT) in the picture-naming task, (F (1, 50) = 5.32; p =.02), significant reduction in %SS (F(1,50) = 4.17; p=.04) and a significant increase in NWR performance (F(1,50) = 7.8 ; p<.000).  A slight (non-significant) reduction occurred in WFD. Additional analyses were conducted across school-groups to determine similarities and differences in patterns between them. Repeated-measures ANOVA were conducted with one within-group factor (two levels, before and after the intervention) and one between group factor (school) and RT as the dependent variable. A main effect was found for occasion (F (1, 49) = 7.04; p = .01), and for the school, (F (1, 49) = 12; p < .000), There was also a significant interaction between time and school, (F (1, 49) = 4.5; p < .04), so RT varied between the two schools.  

Discussion: The preliminary results reveal that this rapid and easy-to-score phonological training task has promise for addressing WFD for Arabic children with EAL. This is in line with previous findings by Howell et al. (2017) on the effectiveness of phonological training in treating WFD. The improvements relative to baseline occurred immediately post-intervention. In ongoing analysis, we process data from follow-up tests to examine whether there are sustained improvements and determine why schools differed.
