# For review only---DO NOT CITE

## Abstract 64

### Language Highlights Event Components: Japanese Ground-Path Categories

Japanese speakers encode ground-path distinctions: different verbs are used if the ground is bounded (e.g., street) or unbounded (e.g., field). English speakers typically do not lexicalize the type of ground a figure crosses. At 14-months, both English- and Japanese-reared children discriminate between these ground-path categories in nonlinguistic dynamic events. By 19-months, only Japanese-reared children maintain these distinctions, suggesting the ambient language influences children’s perception of event components (Göksun et al., 2011). Yet this distinction is not “lost” by English-reared children; when these event categories are accompanied by sentences containing two novel prepositions, toddlers at 23-months discriminate them (Konishi et al., 2019). Adults, however, do not discriminate these event categories given the same exposure (Konishi et al., 2019). The current study explored whether older English-reared children, hearing language that calls attention to ground-path categories, can detect this non-native distinction. 

Thirty 4- to 5-year-olds (48.43-68.60 mo., N=30, 15 males) were tested using the Intermodal Preferential Looking Paradigm (Hirsh-Pasek & Golinkoff, 1996) with the Konishi et al. (2019) stimuli. No a priori preference emerged for either type of ground event. Across 12 exposure trials (each 6-seconds), children viewed three bounded and three unbounded dynamic events, each repeated twice, and heard differential language labeling the bounded and unbounded events (e.g., “She’s walking keet the road”; “She’s walking toke the field”). Then, across three familiarization trials (each 12-seconds), children viewed in silence events from a single ground-path category, either bounded or unbounded. Two test trials then presented a split-screen video of an actor walking across one novel unbounded and one novel bounded ground. Novelty-preference scores (NPS) were calculated to assess whether children showed a preference for the ground-path category not presented during familiarization trials, indicating discrimination of the ground-path categories.

Due to null findings when analyzing children’s performance on the full test trials, children’s performance during the first three seconds, in which participants saw the actor walk halfway across the ground, was explored. This initial response may be a better indicator of older children’s understanding of the ground-path distinction, because they may lose interest over the full trial. A repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted with trial type (salience vs. test average) as the within-subjects variable, and gender and age (sample divided at median age) as between-subjects variables. Results revealed a significant interaction between trial type and gender, F(1, 26)=5.989, p=.02 (Figure 1). Follow-up analyses conducted separately by gender revealed a significant main effect of trial type, F(1, 14)=12.195, p=.004, with higher NPS at test (M=.58, SD=.16) relative to salience (M=.48, SD=.11) only for females. This suggests that, unlike males, females were more likely to perform like infants in that they were able to detect the novel ground-path category at test. 

  Children in the age group of 4 to 5 overall had difficulty detecting the non-native ground-path distinction, performing similarly to adults. Yet, results revealed a significant interaction between children’s performance and gender, suggesting females may have been sensitive to the ground-path distinction following exposure to labels distinguishing those categories. A possible explanation is that males’ greater familiarity with English spatial words in the preschool years (Pruden & Levine, 2017) may serve as a catalyst reducing their ability to detect a non-native semantic distinction. Future work should address limitations by assessing children’s overall language abilities, as well as their knowledge of spatial words, and consider how these factors influence children’s sensitivity to ground-path categories.
