# For review only---DO NOT CITE

## Abstract 76

### Interactional style in child-parent multimodal interaction during the first three years of life

The study investigates the relation between different modalities as these played out in the interaction between 14 child-parent dyads during the children’s first 3 years of life. The research questions were: i) Do different child-parent dyads make use of the various  communicative modalities in similar ways and, if not, in what way do they differ from one another? ii) Are there age related differences in the interactants´ multimodal behavior during the three years of recording? iii) Do potential differences/similarities found in i) and/or ii) relate to the child´s verbal competence at three years of age as measured through SCDI (the Swedish Communicative Development Inventory)?

From studies of language acquisition, we know communication context to be crucial. We know this context need to contain interacting humans (Kuhl et al., 2003; Goldstein & Schwade, 2008); that there has to be shared attention between these interactants (Tomasello, 1995); that the topics named and discussed tend to be present to touch and see (Smith & Yu, 2008), leading to these objects also becoming the child’s first words in speech production (Yu et al., 2005); and that the manner in which parents address the child in these contexts appear to follow a particular pattern (Fernald & Kuhl, 1987; Fernald, 1989). All these traits are suggested to facilitate the acquisition process. Yet, there are many aspects we still do not understand. In terms of context we lack a clear definition of what this context needs to consist of. It is established that children need someone who responds appropriately to the child’s communicative moves (Kuhl et al., 2003; Goldstein & Schwade, 2008; Roseberry et al., 2014). But is it enough with verbal responsive behaviors or is gaze, touch, gestural behavior or facial expressions equally important in this respect? Joint attention has been highlighted as a crucial part of the language acquisition process (Tomasello & Farrar, 1986; Mundy et al., 1990; Dawson et al., 2004). Still, we do not fully understand if this sharing of attention has to include gaze, or if touch, gestures or facial expressions function in the same or a similar way in guiding the child along. In the present study the aim was to disentangle the different modalities and relate them to the child’s vocabulary size at three years of age, while also comparing the dyads behavioral patterns throughout the three years.  

Method. The children were recorded together with one parent on 10 occasions starting when they were 3 months old and ending around the 3rd birthday. The recordings took place in the interaction lab at the Dept of linguistics, Stockholm University. The parents were instructed to play with and handle the child as they normally would, and the room was equipped with three stuffed animals and a few age adequate toys. Each session generated approximately 10 minutes of free interaction, transcribed using the ELAN software (Sloetjes & Wittenburg, 2008). 

Analyses. The extent of possible relationships between interactants’ vocalizations/ verbalizations, gestures, gaze behavior, touch behavior and different facial expressions were examined using correlation analysis. Common factors that may have accounted for highly correlated modalities were examined by means of factor analysis. Preliminary results suggest, for instance, that during the first year of life for one group of dyads “gaze away” and “touch” were correlated, perhaps indicating that the communicative bond between child and parent might rely on touch as well as gaze patterns. 

Discussion. The similarities and differences over time between children, parents and dyads are discussed in the context of the vocabulary level the children had reached at 3 years of age; and to what extent the variation in interactional style could be understood in terms of dynamic systems theory (Thelen & Smith, 2006).
