# For review only---DO NOT CITE

## Abstract 46

### Quantifying the role of rhythm in infants’ language discrimination abilities: A meta-analysis

To begin learning language, infants must make sense of their acoustic input, establishing which sounds and kinds of variation are relevant. Newborns may already prefer their native language (Moon et al., 1993) over a variety that belongs to a different rhythm class: stress-, syllable- or mora-timed (Abercrombie, 1967; Nazzi et al., 1998). Between 4 to 7 months , babies seem to discriminate almost any language or accent from their native variety (Butler et al., 2011; Nazzi et al., 2000), but it is unclear at what age this ability emerges (e.g. Chong et al., 2018; Molnar et al., 2013) or to what extent infants continue relying on “rhythm class”, or prosody in general, for discrimination (Chong et al., 2018; White et al., 2016). The concept of rhythm classes has been contested in recent years (Turk & Shattuck-Hufnagel, 2013; White et al., 2012), so if rhythm is indeed an important cue for infant language discrimination, it is pertinent to establish to which durational cues infants are attentive, such as proportion or variability of vocalic and consonantal intervals (Grabe & Low, 2002; Ramus et al., 1999).

We present a meta-analysis of studies on babies' language discrimination skills. We first aim to quantify how discrimination skills and preference in the first year of life are modulated by the factors age, rhythm classes of the tested languages (same or different rhythm classes), manipulation of stimuli (e.g. low-pass filtered speech), and method (e.g. head-turn preference paradigm, high amplitude sucking). The second aim is to explore which durational metrics (White et al., 2014) best account for language discrimination in the included studies.

A systematic literature search identified studies that tested infants’ (birth to 12 months) discrimination or preference of two language varieties, by presenting babies with auditory or audio-visual continuous speech. Data analysis for the first research goal involved random effects meta-analytic models with the factors rhythm class contrast, age, stimulus manipulation, and method, nested in paradigm (analysing discrimination and preference studies separately). For the second research goal the factor of rhythm class will be replaced with durational metrics (like in White et al., 2014), and Principal Component Analysis will be conducted to explore which metrics best account for language discrimination or preference in the included studies.

37 studies were included. Analyses addressing the first research goal showed a significant effect of method, with central fixation paradigms showing larger effect sizes. The effects of age, rhythm class and speech manipulation and their interactions were not significant. An exploratory subgroup analysis was conducted, examining only studies that tested two distinct languages. In this subgroup of discrimination studies there were no effects of age or rhythm class or their interaction, like in the initial analysis. In the subgroup of preference studies there was a significant interaction of rhythm class and age, whereby a non-native language preference increased with age when the tested languages were in the same rhythm class, but a native language preference increased with age when the tested languages were in different rhythm classes. 

The results suggest that there is insufficient evidence that language discrimination is contingent on rhythm class, even in newborns. However, the results suggest that babies may prefer their native rhythm to varying extents, depending on their age. The former finding may be due to insufficient power or sensitivity of measures, or may reflect issues with rhythm class as a concept (Turk & Shattuck-Hufnagel, 2013; White et al., 2012). Analysis for the second research goal is ongoing and will shed light on whether any durational metrics are more successful than the categorical factor “rhythm class” in characterising the rhythmic properties of language that may inform infants’ language discrimination and preferences.
