#### The Effect of Temperamental Differences on Language Acquisition

[*Liesl Melnick, Sarah C. Kucker*](./authors.md)

sarah.kucker@okstate.edu

Introduction: Children vary incredibly from each other in their temperament and behaviors. Different temperaments are thought to influence variation in children’s vocabulary development as well. For instance, consistent research suggests that higher scores for surgency and effortful control are positively correlated with advanced speaking skills and vocabulary at young ages. Additionally, research demonstrates that personality in adults influences the types of words they use regularly. For example, adults’ neuroticism affects their use of negative emotion words (Pennebaker et al, 2003). However, no study has examined how specific differences in vocabulary might arise in children. Thus, this project seeks to discover if, as children learn to speak, individual temperament affects the categories of words which they learn more efficiently.

Methods: A total of 300 parents of 17- through 37-months-old children participated in the study with 250 completing it online and 50 in person in the lab. Each parent completed the Early Childhood Behavior Questionnaire (ECBQ) very short form (Putnam, Jacobs, Garstein, & Rothbart, 2010) to assess temperament as well as the MacArthur-Bates CDI: Words and Sentences (Fenson et al, 1994) to measure vocabulary. Then, correlational analyses were performed between the child’s score for surgency, effortful control and negative affect and their knowledge of mass and count nouns (Samuelson and Smith, 1999), positive and negative words, and sound words. It was hypothesized that children’s surgency would be positively correlated with knowledge of count nouns and mass nouns, effortful control would be inversely related to sound words, and negative affect would be positively correlated with knowledge of negative words and vice versa for positive words. 

Results: The results demonstrated that effortful control was inversely related to the number of sound words known, r(299)=-.181, p< .001, suggesting that since children with low effortful control typically have a lower vocabulary size (Usai et al 2009), they may instead express themselves through sounds. The results also showed that effortful control was inversely correlated with the number of negative words known, r(299) =-.123, p=.006, which could be related to their typical controlled behavior, leading their parents to use fewer negative words when addressing them. Finally, negative affect was found to be inversely related to the number of mass nouns known, r(299)=-.089, p=.045, suggesting that a fussy nature may influence how frequently children interact with nonsolid objects. Other relationships examined were statistically insignificant. 

Conclusion: Taken together, these findings suggest that variability in the child’s temperament may lead to differences in the child’s vocabulary. This indication demonstrates the importance for future research studies to be cognizant of these differences. In particular, there are important implications for incorporating sources of individual variability in vocabulary for speech therapy and education.

---

