#### Sources of Plasticity in Preterm Children’s Vocabulary Acquisition: Interacting roles of gestational age and parent-child interactions

[*Paige Nelson, Francesca Scheiber, Allison Momany, Kelli Ryckman, Ece Demir-Lira*](./authors)

paige-nelson@uiowa.edu

Children born preterm (< 37 weeks gestational age) risk suffering from delays in their cognitive development compared to their Term peers. Previous literature on Preterm children’s development primarily focused on the role of biological factors, e.g. neurological injury. Recently, literature focusing on parental socioeconomic status (SES) has shown that SES might moderate the relationship between prematurity and cognitive outcomes – where negative cognitive outcomes are higher in Preterm children from disadvantaged SES backgrounds compared to those from advantaged backgrounds. However, parental SES is a composite factor consisting of various subcomponents. Studies on Term children highlight the role of more immediate parent-child interactions for children’s cognitive development, over and above SES (Demir, Rowe, Heller, Goldin-Meadow, & Levine 2015). Here, we examined the role of parent-child language/literacy activities in Preterm and Term children’s language development, in addition to parental SES. Considering the vast literature on the role of gestational age on children’s outcomes, we also asked whether parent-child interactions plays the same or a different role for children born at different gestational ages (GA).

We administered two questionnaires to parents – one assessing language/literacy activities, one assessing child vocabulary skill. To assess parent-child language/literacy activities, we asked parents questions about how often they engage in various language/literacy activities with their children. For example, parents were asked how often they identify names of written alphabet letters with their children. To assess children’s vocabulary skill, parents were administered the DVAP (Developmental Vocabulary Assessment for Parents) (Libertus, Odic, Feigenson, & Halberda 2015). 59 children 3 to 5 years of age were studied (M = 4.54 years, SD= 0.56) and were divided into four groups based on their gestational age across the full spectrum: 8 Early Preterm children (GA < 32.6 weeks), 10 Late Preterm children (GA 33 - 36.6 weeks), 11 Early Term children (GA 37 - 38.6 weeks), and 30 Term children (GA 39-41.6 weeks). 

We ran a two-way ANOVA with Group (Early Preterm, Late Preterm, Early Term, and Term), Language/literacy activities, and Group X Language/literacy activities interaction to predict DVAP, while controlling for children’s age at testing and parent education. Controlling for age at testing and education, there was a trend in the direction of Language/literacy activities varying by group (F (3, 49) = 2.388, p = .08). Follow-up analyses showed that language/literacy activities were more predictive of DVAP for Late Preterm children than other GA groups. There was no significant effect of Group controlling for language/literacy activities. To sum, the results showed that parental cognitive stimulation might predict outcomes more than broad factors, such as parental SES. Further, parent-child interactions might play a larger role for Preterm children – specifically for Late Preterm children. Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that prematurity might exhibit a heightened case of plasticity where environmental influences might play a larger role in children’s outcomes than Term (DeMaster, Bick, Johnson, Landry, & Duncan 2019). Further, late prematurity may be at the optimum point for plasticity, which could possibly explain the greater role of input for this group of children.

---

