#### Determinants of lexical development in Dutch toddlers

[*Josje Verhagen, Mees van Stiphout, Elma Blom*](./authors)

J.Verhagen@uva.nl

Children typically acquire words like “mommy” and “banana” before “interesting” and “washing machine”. Previous work suggests that specific properties of words predict which words are acquired first, including word frequency, concreteness, and phonological properties, such as word length, phonological complexity, and neighborhood density (Ambridge et al., 215; Hansen, 2017). Since these factors are often correlated (e.g., shorter words tend to be more concrete and more frequent than longer words), it is crucial that multiple factors are analyzed together. To date, two studies have assessed the independent effects of a large set of factors on children’s early lexical development. In the first, Hansen (2017) investigated how frequency, concreteness, word class, and neighborhood density impacted on acquisition (CDI) data from 5,674 Norwegian children, and showed that frequency was the most important predictor, followed by concreteness. In the second, Braginsky and colleagues (2017) investigated CDI data from over 38,000 children across 10 different languages. In all languages, word frequency and concreteness were amongst the most important predictors of whether children had acquired a word, with phonological factors playing a less important role. The authors also observed interactions with age and word class, such that effects of frequency and concreteness became more important with age, and effects of concreteness were stronger for nouns than function words. In the current study, we build on these earlier studies in two ways. First, we investigate the determinants of early lexical acquisition in a new language: Dutch. Second, by including not only word-based predictors, but also child-based predictors (i.e., age, gender, parental education), we assess the relative weight of the word-based predictors, once variation at the child level is controlled. Specifically, we address the following questions: (i) How do frequency, concreteness and phonological factors predict lexical acquisition in Dutch-speaking toddlers, once differences in age, gender and parents’ level education are controlled? (ii) Do the effects of the word-based predictors vary with age and word class? Data were analyzed from 1,075 monolingual Dutch children (mean age = 28 months, SD = 3.6 months) whose parents had completed the short form of the Dutch CDI (Zink & Lejaegere, 2002). CDI items were coded for word frequency (based on CHILDES), concreteness (Brysbaert et al., 2014), word class (nouns, adverbs/adjectives, verbs), word length (in phonemes), neighborhood density, and number of consonant clusters. A generalized linear mixed-effect regression model showed main effects of frequency and concreteness after controlling for age, gender and parental education, such that words that were more frequent and concrete were more likely to be acquired than words that were less concrete and less frequent (ORfrequency = 13.31 ORconcreteness = 6.70, ps < .001). Word class and phonological factors showed no effects. Regarding interactions with age and word class, the results showed that the effects of frequency and concreteness decreased with age and that the effect of frequency was stronger for nouns as compared to adverbs, adjectives and verbs. These findings support earlier results and extend these in several ways. First, as in other languages, concreteness and frequency were the strongest predictors in Dutch (Braginsky et al., 2017; Hansen, 2017). Second, the effect of frequency was stronger for nouns than for other word classes (Braginsky et al., 2017; Goodman et al., 2008). Third, like in Braginsky et al. (2017), effects of frequency and concreteness changed with age, albeit in the opposite direction. Finally, we add to earlier work by showing that concreteness and frequency predict lexical acquisition once differences in age and gender are controlled. Implications of these findings for theories of early word learning will be discussed.

---

