#### Co-development of language and social action in a child with Down Syndrome

[*Iris Nomikou, Alessandra Fasulo, Joanna Nye, Leanne Chrisostomou*](./authors)

iris.nomikou@port.ac.uk

Language development in children with Down Syndrome is characterised by an asynchrony (Miller, Leddu, Miolo & Sedey, 1995). On the one hand there are difficulties in sound articulation, in syntax and the development of the lexicon and therefore difficulties in the ability to form longer utterances and express more complex messages. So children remain at the one-word period longer than typically developing children, also experiencing failure in being understood. On the other hand, compared to typically developing children they will have gained more interactional experience as they will have participated in communicative exchanges for much longer than the TD children with the same language development in terms of e.g. mean length of utterance or grammatical competence. So there seems to be a tension between what these children would want to communicate about and the resources they can use to achieve this. We suggest that this tension is interesting in making visible how children develop ways of displaying understanding and achieving intersubjectivity.

Furthermore, assuming that language development is driven by acting and interacting in the physical and social world (Nomikou, Schilling, Heller & Rohlfing, 2016), we suggest that to understand the development of language in children with Down Syndrome there is a need for a detailed analysis of their social interactions. According to this approach, we would expect that as a child’s interactional experience becomes more variable, there would be a need to express oneself in a more differentiated way.

To explore this developmental trajectory, we conducted a longitudinal, exploratory, microanalytic case study of a girl with Down Syndrome at three time points (three, four, and five years of age) during three fifteen-minute free play interactions with her mother. This girl, whom we will call Felicity, has a very limited productive vocabulary and makes use to a large extent of non-lexical vocalisations and Makaton signs. From the video recordings we collected all Felicity's utterances and, using a Conversation Analysis approach, analysed their sequential position (initiating or responding), the social actions they pursued (e.g. requests, proposals, assessments) and the full range of verbal, non-verbal and prosodic resources used to implement these actions.

Our first results suggest that, at the first time point, Felicity’s vocalisations are often used in overlap with Makaton signs, to signal speakership and announce upcoming actions. There is very little phonological variability in these vocalisations but a very rich modulation of intonation. In combination with gaze and pointing gestures, the child can preface actions, make proposals and requests, and agree or disagree with the mother’s proposals and respond to questions. Interestingly the vocalisations punctuate very brief fragments of actions, for example picking up one object and putting it on another to make a tower.

With time, in visits two and three we can see an expansion of the repertoire of vocalisations, with different sounds and voice modulation, as well as one-word utterances (such as “yes”, “floor”). The repertoire of actions correspondingly widens. Other actions start to emerge, such as assessments, which allow the child to go beyond communicating about how to play the game and share with the adult what might be noteworthy ‘about’ the ongoing action. Finally, we see that play itself becomes less fragmented and more stretched as a narrative. The child can now plan and perform a series of events and, with the use of vocalisations, gaze and pointing, create what seems to be a narrative about it.

Our data suggest that language development is shaped by the interdependence of the increasing complexity of how the child constructs the play, her ability to perform more differentiated social actions, and the need for her to use more specific linguistic resources to navigate interactions.

---

