#### Individual variation across the socio-economic strata : a differential contribution of mothers’ and fathers’ speech in high- and low-SES families.

[*Stéphanie Barbu, Ludivine Glas, Bahia Guellaï, Alban Lemasson, Virginie Durier, Aurélie Nardy, Jean Pierre Chevrot, Jacques Juhel*](./authors.md)

stephanie.barbu@univ-rennes1.fr

Parental speech to the child has a major influence on language acquisition and individual differences. Much of the early research has been conducted with mothers as mothers remain the primary caregiver in various cultures and are generally more available to researchers than fathers. Despite a growing interest in fatherhood, studies observing both mothers and fathers with their child remain too rare to evaluate accurately any possible interaction between parents and child characteristics. Family socio-economic status (SES) has also profound and pervasive effects on parenting and language input. These findings and shortcomings stress the need to study the complex interactions between child x parent x family characteristics throughtout early language development. To do so, we focused on how young children from 2 to 6 years old, from two contrasting social backgrounds, acquire a frequent phonological alternation in French: liaison. Liaisons represent a challenging task for young learners in word segmentation and learning from the flow of speech leading to frequent errors in young children. Moreover, liaisons are of two types: obligatory liaisons, which are categorical and do not vary with speakers’ characteristics in adults; and variable liaisons, which are a sociolinguistic variable and are more frequently produced by high-SES adults and women. Liaisons are therefore prone to evidence the impact of quantitative and qualitative differences in children’s input and to explore the causes of individual differences in language. In this perspective, 100 French monolingual children and their parents participated in a set of studies. Using a picture naming task eliciting the production of the two types of liaisons, we evidenced early, but temporary SES differences for obligatory liaisons as well as sex differences in low-SES children, but not in high-SES children; low-SES boys presented the lowest performances. Variable liaisons revealed SES differences that appeared progressively during preschool years, but no sex differences. Different developmental and social patterns were thus observed for the two types of liaisons. To investigate whether these differences were related to differences in the input children receive in relation to parents and child characteristics, both parents participated in a picture naming task and in a book reading task with their child. We evidenced SES differences in parents’ productions of variable liaisons in both tasks, but no overall sex difference. Nevertheless, we found an unexpected result: high-SES fathers realized liaisons less frequently with their 2-3 year-olds than fathers with older children and mothers whatever the child age (3-4, 4-5, 5-6 years old). This pattern was not observed in the picture naming task and not for low-SES parents. We also found a relation between parents’ and children’s productions for high-SES fathers in the book reading task only. These findings suggest that high-SES fathers adjust their speech to the youngest children. By realizing fewer liaisons, fathers may help their child to identify words in the flow of speech; and this probably helps for the first steps of liaison acquisition. This also leads to re-examine in the light of possible differences related to family SES the assumption that mothers are seen as providing more linguistic support for their child by tuning their speech to the child’s needs, whereas fathers are seen to be more challenging.

---

