#### Different developmental trajectories in Dutch and Turkish children’s acquisition of space-pitch terminology

[*Sarah Dolscheid, Simge Çelik, Hasan Erkan, Aylin Küntay, Asifa Majid*](./authors.md)

sarah.verlage@uni-bielefeld.de

Languages vary considerably in how they describe sensory experiences like colors, odors, or sounds. For instance, some languages express auditory pitch in terms of spatial height (high vs. low pitch), while others use thickness terminology (thick = low frequency vs. thin = high frequency). To what extent do these cross-linguistic differences affect the way children learn space-pitch vocabulary and how do children associate spatial dimensions and pitch when no language is used? We addressed these questions by examining the developmental trajectory of linguistic and non-linguistic space-pitch associations in children who acquire Dutch (using height-pitch terminology) vs. Turkish (using thickness-pitch terminology). Five age-groups (5-year-olds, 7-year-olds, 9-year-olds, 11-year-olds, and adults) were tested in linguistic height-pitch and thickness-pitch comprehension tasks as well as in nonlinguistic height-pitch and thickness-pitch association tasks. Overall, we found better performance for thickness-pitch than for height-pitch associations in both linguistic and non-linguistic tasks. This was true for Turkish speaking children but also for Dutch children who are not exposed to thickness-pitch terminology in their input language. Consequently, associations between spatial thickness and pitch do not seem to originate in linguistic pitch terminology and appear more intuitive for children than height-pitch associations. By contrast, Dutch speaking children did not show reliable height-pitch associations and full comprehension of height-pitch terminology until age 11, thus rather late in development. Turkish speaking children even reversed height-pitch associations. That is, they consistently associated higher spatial elevation with a low-pitched sound and vice versa for high-pitched sounds in both the linguistic and the non-linguistic height-pitch task. The acquisition of height-pitch mappings thus appears less stable than thickness-pitch associations and leads to more pronounced differences between Dutch and Turkish speaking participants. In sum, our findings demonstrate that even within a single domain (i.e., pitch terminology) different degrees of linguistic influence seem to be at play. While thickness-pitch associations are acquired in similar ways by Turkish and Dutch children, the acquisition of height-pitch terminology differs more substantially across cultures.

---

