#### Do older children with ASD continue to show lack of a right-hand bias for gesturing?

[*Nevena Dimitrova, Christine Mohr, Sandra Pache, Seyda Ozcaliskan*](./authors.md)

nevena.dimitrova@hetsl.ch

Handedness is closely associated with language abilities in child speakers (Bates et al. 1986; Vauclair and Imbault 2009). More importantly, right-handed children show better language skills than their left-handed peers (Somers et al. 2015). Research also suggests that hand preference in gesture production predicts language abilities (e.g., Cochet and Vauclair 2010). Specifically, typically developing (TD) children’s production of deictic gestures with their right hand (e.g., point at cat) serves as a reliable predictor of their spoken language abilities (Cochet and Vauclair 2010; Esseily et al. 2011). Recent work suggests that even though children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) do not show the strong right-hand preference for gesturing found in TD children, gestures with the right hand–especially deictic ones–predict language abilities in young children with ASD (Dimitrova et al., 2020). The aim of this study is to determine whether patterns of hand preference for gesturing and its links to language abilities remain similar for older children with ASD and with TD.

Sixty-eight children including 41 TD children (mean age=3.5 years, age range=26-60, 24 girls) and 27 children with ASD (mean age=5.8 years,  range=33-146, 7 girls) participated; the two groups were comparable in expressive vocabulary (EVT; Williams, 2007) at the time of our observations.  All children were videorecorded for 10 minutes (M=10.13, SD=.64), while playing with structured toys with their primarily caregiver. Children’s gestures were further coded for hand preference: they were then tallied for hand preference (Left vs. Right) for all gestures and for only deictic gestures (e.g., point at cat).

Our results showed similar patterns of differences in hand preference for gesturing in the two groups of children at the later ages. TD children produced more right-handed gestures (M=62%, SD=.28) than children with ASD (M=47%, SD=.29; p=.033), showing a pattern in gesture production akin to production of other manual activities in younger children in earlier work (Cornish and McManus 1996; Dane and Balci 2007). TD children also produced greater number of right handed deictic gestures than TD children, further extending earlier work to older children. There was, however, no reliable correlations between either right or left-handed gesturing and child vocabulary size—for either overall gesture production (TD: ps≥.623, ASD: ps≥.561) or for deictic gesture production (TD: ps≥.255, ASD: ps≥.638). 

These results thus suggest that even though children with ASD continue to show a greater preference for left-handed gesturing than TD children at the later ages, the relative production of right-handed gestures no longer plays a predictive role for child vocabulary in either group. Taken together, these findings suggest that the language learning difficulties and delays found in children with ASD (Tager-Flusberg and Caronna 2007) might be associated with long-lasting atypical laterality for gestures, likely stemming from a reduced left hemisphere dominance for language in autism.

---

