#### Neurodevelopmental Differences in Autism Spectrum Disorder Applied to Language Learning

[*Kelly L. Coburn, Diane L. Williams*](./authors)

klc92@psu.edu

Background:  Neurodevelopmental processes that begin in utero and continue throughout childhood typically contribute to language development. Improved models of the neurofunctional bases of language can help us to understand typical development, as well as the disruptions to language that occur in neurodevelopmental conditions like autism spectrum disorder (ASD). ASD is one of the most common neurodevelopmental conditions, currently estimated to affect 1 in 54 American children (Maenner et al., 2020). Understanding the structural and functional differences in the brains of autistic children may provide guidance for speech-language pathologists in the selection of current evidence-based practices to support the development of language of children with ASD. Furthermore, recent findings may assist in the design of more effective interventions to support communication development. 

Method: We conducted a focused literature review to identify reports of neurological studies or review articles that inform language learning and related learning processes in ASD. Studies included in this tutorial were peer-reviewed, published since 2005, and addressed behavioral and neurological aspects of language learning in children with typical development and/or ASD. We then integrated this knowledge with the literature on evidence-based speech-language intervention practices for autistic children.  

Results:  In this session, typical postnatal brain development (TD) will be discussed in relation to the known neurodevelopmental differences that occur in ASD. Evidence from structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), magnetoencephalography (MEG), and electroencephalography (EEG) will be summarized. Structural differences in ASD include altered patterns of cortical growth with most studies reporting increased cortical thickness relative to TD (Anagnastou & Taylor, 2011). Alterations in myelination are evident in ASD as indicated by the results of DTI studies (Travers et al., 2012), suggesting less efficient conduction of neural signals.  

Functional differences occur at all levels of the brain, from lateralization of functions (e.g. Eyler et al., 2012) in the cortex to the rhythmic activations of single neurons. Neuronal oscillations are rhythmic patterns of excitation and inhibition of brain cells that contribute to the synchronization of diffuse cortical regions and play a role in our human sense of timing (Simon & Wallace, 2016). Neuronal oscillations, in particular, could help explain disrupted language development by elucidating the timing differences in autistic brains that contribute to reduced functional connectivity, complex information processing, and speech parsing (Simon & Wallace, 2016). Disrupted neuronal oscillations could contribute to uncoordinated timing of speech perception and word segmentation. Findings related to implicit statistical learning, explicit learning of behavioral tasks, multisensory integration, and reinforcement in ASD will also be discussed.  

Conclusion:  Implications of known neural differences can be extended to language instruction and clinical intervention for autistic children at early stages of language learning. The reviewed findings lend additional scientific support to some commonly-used evidence-based treatment strategies. Some of those strategies are: the use of short, simple phrases; repetition of syntactic structures with varied vocabulary, rather than over-repetition of single words; cautious use of pause time; visual supports, including augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) tools; and individualized sensory accommodations. These and other related suggestions for neurologically-informed language intervention will be discussed.

---

