#### A computational study of the mechanisms underlying infant speed of processing and vocabulary development

[*Andrew Jessop, Gary Jones, Caroline Rowland*](./authors)

andrew.jessop@mpi.nl

During their second year, infants experience rapid vocabulary growth while simultaneously becoming faster and more efficient at processing familiar words (Fernald et al., 2006). Longitudinal studies have found that children with the fastest language processing speeds tend to have larger concurrent vocabularies and faster vocabulary growth throughout development (Peter et al., 2019). However, there is currently no concrete mechanistic account that explains why some children are fast or slow at processing language, and how this speed of processing is related to vocabulary development. The present work used computational models to test two theories of speed of processing. As it is often assumed that there are individual differences in children’s intrinsic processing abilities that shape their vocabulary development, the first theory was an intrinsic processing account where speed of processing stems from endogenous differences in the child’s ability to process language input. Another possibility is that individual differences in speed of processing reflect variance in the infant’s language knowledge, so we also considered whether a more parsimonious experience-only account could capture the findings of previous behavioural studies. These two theories were tested in the CLASSIC model (Jones et al., 2014), which uses chunk-based learning to acquire vocabulary by binding adjacent sequences in the input and learning them as larger chunks. At first, the model needs many small chunks to represent the input, but it gradually shifts to using fewer and larger chunks with experience (e.g., /w/e/n/t/ → /we/nt/ → /went/). We tested the intrinsic processing theory by varying the number of chunks CLASSIC can process at any one time (2-7 chunks on average) while keeping the language input constant. Increasing this limit allows the learner to process more of the input in the same period, thus models that can retain six chunks are faster processors than those limited to three. To test the experience-only theory, this processing limit was held constant and we measured the average number of chunks the model used to process the input, which varied in quantity (5000-30,000 utterances). Here, learners that need fewer chunks are faster, as each chunk incurs a cost and consumes a portion of the limited resources available. The results showed that raising the number of chunks the learner could process led to a larger vocabulary and faster growth, consistent with the intrinsic theory. Furthermore, the models that received the most language input used fewer chunks and tended to have larger concurrent vocabulary sizes, consistent with the experience-only theory. This work represents one of the first mechanistic studies of individual differences in speed of processing and vocabulary development. The results demonstrate that, while this relationship can be modelled by manipulating the learner's intrinsic processing abilities, it can also be observed through a purely emergent process.

---

